[DOCS] Edit ILM GS tutorial (#51513)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/ilm/getting-started-ilm.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[testenv="basic"]

[[getting-started-index-lifecycle-management]]

> == Get started: Automate roll over with {ilm-init}

Reviewer: I think it's `rollover` when used as a noun.
```suggestion
== Get started: Automate rollover with {ilm-init}
```

++++

> <titleabbrev>Automate roll over</titleabbrev>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<titleabbrev>Automate rollover</titleabbrev>
```

++++

This tutorial demonstrates how to use {ilm} ({ilm-init}) 
to manage indices that contain time-series data. 

When you continuously index timestamped documents into {es} using 
Filebeat, Logstash, or some other mechanism, 

> you typically use an index alias so you can periodically roll over to a new index.

Reviewer: Link for index alias?

This enables you to implement a hot-warm-cold architecture to meet your performance
requirements for your newest data, control costs over time, enforce retention policies,
and still get the most out of your data.

> To automate roll over and management of time-series indices with {ilm-init}, you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To automate rollover and management of time-series indices with {ilm-init}, you:
```

> . <<ilm-gs-create-policy, Create a lifecycle policy>> with the {ilm-init} Put policy API.  

Reviewer: I don't think "Put" needs to capitalized.
> . <<ilm-gs-create-policy, Create a lifecycle policy>> with the {ilm-init} Put policy API.

. <<ilm-gs-apply-policy, Create an index template>> to apply the policy to each new index.

> . <<ilm-gs-bootstrap, Bootstrap an index>> as the initial write index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<ilm-gs-bootstrap, Create an initial write index>>.
```

> . <<ilm-gs-check-progress, Verify that indices are moving through the lifecycle phases>> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<ilm-gs-check-progress, Verify indices are moving through the lifecycle phases>> 
```

> as expected with the {ilm-init} Explain API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as expected with the {ilm-init} explain API. 
```

[float]
[[ilm-gs-create-policy]]
=== Create a lifecycle policy

A lifecycle policy specifies the phases in the index lifecycle

> and the actions to perform in each phase. A lifecycle can have up to four  phases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the actions to perform in each phase. A lifecycle can have up to four phases:
```

`hot`, `warm`, `cold`, and `delete`. Policies are defined in JSON 

> and added through the {ilm-init} Put policy API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and added through the {ilm-init} put policy API. 
```

For example, the following request creates a `data_stream` policy with two phases:
 
* The `hot` phase defines a `rollover` action to specify that an index rolls over when it 
reaches either a `max_size` of 50 gigabytes or a `max_age` of 30 days.
* The `delete` phase uses `min_age` to remove the index 90 days after rollover.
Note that this value is relative to the rollover time, not the index creation time. 

[source,console]
------------------------
PUT _ilm/policy/datastream_policy 
{
  "policy": {                       
    "phases": {
      "hot": {                      <1>
        "actions": {
          "rollover": {             
            "max_size": "50GB",     <2>
            "max_age": "30d"
          }
        }
      },
      "delete": {
        "min_age": "90d",           <3>
        "actions": {
          "delete": {}              <4>
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
------------------------

> <1> The `min_age` defaults to `0ms`, so new indices enter the hot phase immediately. 

Reviewer: Phases are enclosed in backticks earlier.
```suggestion
<1> The `min_age` defaults to `0ms`, so new indices enter the `hot` phase immediately. 
```

<2> Trigger the `rollover` action when either of the conditions are met.

> <3> Move the index into the delete phase 90 days after rollover.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> Move the index into the `delete` phase 90 days after rollover.
```

> <4> Trigger the `delete` action when the index enters the delete phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<4> Trigger the `delete` action when the index enters the `delete` phase.
```

See <<_actions>> for the complete list of actions available in each phase.

[float]
[[ilm-gs-apply-policy]]
=== Create an index template to apply the lifecycle policy

To automaticaly apply a lifecycle policy to the new write index on rollover, 

> you specify the policy in the index template used to create new indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specify the policy in the index template used to create new indices.
```

For example, the following request creates a `datastream_template` that is applied to new indices
whose names match the `datastream-*` index pattern. 
The template configures two {ilm-init} settings:

* `index.lifecycle.name` specifies the name of the lifecycle policy to apply to all new indices that match 
the index pattern.  

> * `index.lifecycle.rollover_alias` specifies the index alias that will be rolled over 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `index.lifecycle.rollover_alias` specifies the index alias to be rolled over 
```

[[getting-started-index-lifecycle-management]]
== Getting started with {ilm}

This tutorial demonstrates how to use {ilm} ({ilm-init}) 
to manage indices that contain time-series data. 

When you use a mechanism like Filebeat to continuously index documents into {es},
you typically use an index alias so you can periodically roll over to a new index.
This enables you to implement a hot-warm-cold architecture to meet your performance
requirements for your newest data, control costs over time, enforce retention policies,

> and still get the most out of your data.

Reviewer 2: can we emphasize that any data source is ok to be used? (I think the current version, albeit more composed, ties ILM to Filebeat, which is something that some users might not be familiar with) Maybe something along the lines of
"When using a a time series data source like Filebeat to continuously ..." ?

Author: Changed to, "When you continuously index timestamped documents into {es} using 
Filebeat, Logstash, or some other mechanism..."

To automate roll over and management of time-series indices with {ilm-init}, you:

. <<ilm-gs-create-policy, Create a lifecycle policy>> with the {ilm-init} Put policy API.  
. <<ilm-gs-apply-policy, Create an index template>> to apply the policy to each new time-series index.
. <<ilm-gs-bootstrap, Bootstrap the initial time-series index>> by explicitly designating it as the write index.
. <<ilm-gs-check-progress, Verify that indexes are moving through the lifecycle phases>> as expected with the 

> you use the {ilm-init} explain API. 

Reviewer 2: "with the explain API"

[float]
[[ilm-gs-create-policy]]
=== Create a lifecycle policy

> In your lifecycle policy, you specify the phases in your index lifecycle

Reviewer 2: Shall we rephrase "In your lifecycle policy" to "When you create a lifecycle policy" ? ("in your ..." sounds a bit confusing as the user is just looking to create a policy now)

and the actions to perform in each phase. A lifecycle can have up to four  phases:
`hot`, `warm`, `cold`, and `delete`. Policies are defined in JSON 
and added through the {ilm-init} Put policy API. 

For example, the following request creates a `data_stream` policy with two phases:
 
* The `hot` phase defines a `rollover` action to specify that an index rolls over when it 
reaches either a `max_size` of 50 gigabytes or a `max_age` of 30 days.
* The `delete` phase uses `min_age` to move an index into the

> delete phase when it is 90 days old and immediately triggers the  `delete` action to remove the index.

Reviewer 2: nit: "the  `delete` action" - there're some extra spaces before `delete`

Author: Fixed.

[source,console]
------------------------
PUT _ilm/policy/datastream_policy 
{
  "policy": {                       
    "phases": {
      "hot": {                      <1>
        "actions": {
          "rollover": {             
            "max_size": "50GB",     <2>
            "max_age": "30d"
          }
        }
      },
      "delete": {
        "min_age": "90d",           <3>
        "actions": {
          "delete": {}              <4>
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
------------------------

<1> The `min_age` field defaults to `0ms` in the hot phase, so new indices immediately enter the hot phase. 
<2> The `rollover` action is triggered when any of the conditions are met.
<3> An index is moved into the delete phase after 90 days.

> <4> No additional conditions are specified, so the `delete` action is triggered when the index enters the delete phase. 

Reviewer 2: the delete action doesn't support any conditionals/parameters so I think we shouldn't mention conditionals here but rather "The delete action is triggered ..."

Author: Fixed.

-----------------------
// TEST[continued]

<1> Apply the template to a new index if its name starts with "datastream-". 
<2> The name of the lifecycle policy to apply to each new index.

> <3> The index alias must be specified if a policy uses the rollover action.

Reviewer 2: nit: "The rollover alias"

-----------------------
// TEST[continued]

> <1> Apply the template to a new index if its name starts with "datastream-". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Apply the template to a new index if its name starts with `datastream-`. 
```

//////////////////////////

[float]
[[ilm-gs-bootstrap]]

> === Bootstrap the initial time-series index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Create an initial time-series index
```

> To get things started, you need to bootstrap an initial index and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get things started, you need to create an initial index and 
```

designate it as the write index for the rollover alias specified in your index template. 
The name of this index must match the template's index pattern and end with a number. 
On rollover, this value is incremented to generate a name for the new index. 

> For example, the following request creates an index called `datastream_000001` 

Reviewer 2: `datastream_000001` -> `datastream-000001`

-----------------------
// TEST[continued]

When the rollover conditions are met, the rollover action:

* Creates a new index called `datastream-000002`. 
This matches the `datastream-*` pattern, so the settings from `datastream_template` are applied to the new index.

> * Designates the new index as the write index and makes the bootstrap index read-only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Designates the new index as the write index and makes `datastream-000001` read-only.
```

> This process will repeat each time the rollover conditions are met. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process repeats each time rollover conditions are met. 
```

You can search across all of the indices managed by the `datastream_policy` with the `datastream` alias. 
Write operations are routed to the current write index. 

For more information about write indices and rollover, see the <<rollover-index-api-desc, Rollover API>>.

[float]
[[ilm-gs-check-progress]]
=== Checking progress

> To get status information for {ilm-init}-managed indices, you use the Explain API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get status information for {ilm-init}-managed indices, you use the explain API. 
```

This lets you find out things like:

* What phase an index is in and when it entered that phase.
* The current action and what step is being performed.
* If any errors have occurred or progress is blocked.

For example, the following request gets information about the `datastream` indices: 

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------
GET datastream-*/_ilm/explain
--------------------------------------------------
// TEST[continued]

> The response below shows that the bootstrap index is waiting in the `hot` phase's `rollover` action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response below shows that the `datastream-000001` index is waiting in the `hot` phase's `rollover` action.
```

> It will remain in this state and {ilm-init} will continue to call `attempt-rollover` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It remains in this state and {ilm-init} continues to call `attempt-rollover` 
```
